# ISO HLS Article 5: Leadership

This summary is by OpenAI ChatGPT.

Emphasizes the critical role of top management in driving the effectiveness of
the management system. It requires leaders to demonstrate commitment by taking
accountability for system performance, aligning it with the organization’s
strategic direction, and integrating it into core business processes. This
article also mandates leadership to establish a clear policy, assign relevant
roles and responsibilities, and ensure that resources and communication are
adequate. By placing leadership at the center, Article 5 ensures that the
management system is not just a procedural formality but a strategic tool
supported and guided from the top.

## Purpose

**Article 5: Leadership** is a central pillar of the ISO High-Level Structure
(HLS) for management system standards. This article emphasizes the **active role
of top management** in implementing, supporting, and continually improving the
management system.

It replaces older concepts like "management representative" with a broader, more
integrated expectation: **leaders must lead**, not delegate quality,
environmental, or safety responsibilities entirely to others.

Objectives:

1. **Demonstrate commitment** from top management.

2. **Align the management system with the organization’s strategic direction**.

3. **Integrate the system into core business processes**.

4. **Promote a culture of continuous improvement**.

5. **Ensure clear roles, responsibilities, and communication**.

Leadership isn’t about paperwork—it’s about **ownership**, **direction**, and **accountability**.

## Checklist

Use this checklist to ensure that leadership obligations are fully addressed:

**5.1 Leadership and Commitment:**

* Has top management taken responsibility for the effectiveness of the management system?

* Do they promote continual improvement and customer (or stakeholder) focus?

* Is the system aligned with the organization’s strategy?

* Are policies, objectives, and resources in place and reviewed by leadership?

**5.2 Policy:**

* Has top management established a clear, concise policy (quality, environmental, safety, etc.)?

* How is the policy appropriate to the organization’s context?
  
* How is the policy aligned with strategic direction?

* How is the policy communicated and understood internally?
  
* How is the policy available to relevant interested parties?

**5.3 Roles and Responsibilities:**

* Are roles and responsibilities clearly defined, clearly assigned, clearly communicated, and confirmed understood?

* Do people have the authority to act?

* Do people have accountability enforced at all levels?

## Example: ISO 9001:2015 (Quality Management System)

* **5.1 Leadership and Commitment**. The CEO of a medical device company chairs
quarterly QMS review meetings, ensures quality metrics are integrated into
business KPIs, and supports training programs. Instead of delegating quality to
one department, the CEO leads quality-focused initiatives and discusses
performance regularly with department heads.

* **5.2 Quality Policy**. We are committed to delivering safe, effective, and
innovative medical devices that exceed customer expectations and meet regulatory
requirements. We achieve this through employee engagement, continual
improvement, and ethical business practices. The policy is printed on workplace
posters, included in training, and published on the company website.

* **5.3 Roles and Responsibilities**. The head of operations is responsible for
production quality. A quality assurance manager oversees audits and corrective
actions. All department heads are responsible for quality in their teams, as
documented in an organizational responsibility matrix.
